feat[cartesian]: 2D temporaries [Experimental] (#2314)
GridTools/gt4py: docs/development/ADRs/cartesian/experimental/2d-temporaries.md

# ⚠️ 2 Dimenions Temporaries

In the context of porting physics parametrizations, we have encoutered multiple examples of computation requiring a temporary 2D storage within a stencil.

We thus decided to expand the DLS be able to port these stencils. We accept the increase in DSL surface and test it as an [experimental feature](../experimental-features.md).

## Context

> Porting physics parametrizations, we found temporary 2D field used, mostly when computing particular level (surface, phase change, etc.). Previous workaround was to define the temporaries as an argument. The goal is to undo this workaround that complexify calling code.

Author: Those examples are from actual code - which I think is always superior. I'll add the one you pointed out.

        if (
            log(target_pressure) > pb
            and log(target_pressure) <= log(p_interface_mb[0, 0, 1] * 100)
            and not boolean_2d_mask
        ):
            interpolated_field = field
            boolean_2d_mask = True

        # ensure every point was actually touched
        if boolean_2d_mask == False:  # noqa
            interpolated_field = field

    # reset masks and temporaries for later use
    with computation(FORWARD), interval(0, 1):
        boolean_2d_mask = False
        pb = 0
        pt = 0
```

2D temporaries would clean those code and allow for futher optimization (scalarization) in all performance backend.

## Decision

All the guardraisls for 2D temporaries are already in place:

- allocation can only be done under `interval == 1` and `computation` in `FORWARD` or `BACKWARD`,
- use of 2D fields are fully defined, using the above rules again.

The main change is on the frontend of stencils and proper forwarding of dimensions through to code genreation, except for `gt:X` backend (see [Consequences](#consequences)).

Type hint for temporaries have been introduced before for mixed precision e.g.:

```python

> with computation(PARALLEL), inteval(...):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
with computation(PARALLEL), interval(...):
```

    tmp_3D_as_f32: float32 = 0
```

We propose to extend this type hint to allow specification of the dimensions re-using the `FieldDescriptor`, e.g.

```python
with computation(FORWARD), inteval(...):
    tmp_2D_as_f32: Field[IJ, np.float64] = 0
```

> We also guard against any definition of other type of temporaries (e.g. 1D temporary) because they are ill-defined within `gtscript` which pre-suppose that the horizontal dimensions are always computed upon.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We also guard against any definition of other type of temporaries (e.g. 1D temporaries) because they are ill-defined within `gtscript` which pre-supposes that the horizontal dimensions are always computed upon.
```

> The type hint can be a little verbose, so we offer to expand upon the `dtypes` dictionnary present in stencil configuration to give a `str: type` pair that can be swapped at parsing time, as long as the type is a derivative of `FieldDescriptor` so the relevant informations can be retrieved.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The type hint can be a little verbose, so we offer to expand upon the `dtypes` dictionary present in stencil configuration to give a `str: type` pair that can be swapped at parsing time, as long as the type is a derivative of `FieldDescriptor` so the relevant information can be retrieved.
```

```python
@stencil(backend=..., dtype={"My2DType": Field[IJ, np.float64]})
def the_stencil(...):
    with computation(FORWARD), inteval(...):
        tmp_2D: My2DType = 0
        ...
```

## Consequences

Users of GT4Py can now defined 2D temporaries in-stencil.

> There's one remaining hiccups: GridTools C++ does not natively offer 2D temporaries. GridTools pre-suppose that all computation of temporaries are done on the 3D grid at least - and won't allocate below that dimensionality.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
There's one remaining hiccup: GridTools C++ does not natively offer 2D temporaries. GridTools pre-supposes that all computations of temporaries are done on the 3D grid at least - and won't allocate below that dimensionality.
```
